# Decision_Maker
Decision Maker program that implements decision list for word sense disambiguation.  
Developed for University of Minnesota Duluth course Intro to Natural Language Processing.  
Author: Ruta Wheelock  
Date: 11/15/2017  

## Part I - Build decision list from training data
### Description
This program builds decision list using training data for word sense disambiguation.  
Program expects training data in a specific format that was provided for this assignment.  
To run the program, execute:  
```
$ ./decision-list-train.py trainig-data.txt
```
The second command line argument is a name of training data, which is in the same
directory where this program.  
Program writes decision list to the standard output.  
To write the decision list in a file, execute:  
```
$ ./decision-list-train.py trainig-data.txt > decision-list.txt
```
### Algorithm
Decision list is based on adjacent word likelihood to predict a word sense to the target word.  
The program collects adjacent words to the target word and calculates
their log-likelihood as described in David Yarowsky paper "Decision Lists for Lexical Ambiguity
Resolution". If multiple words have the same log-likelihood, adjacent word count is used for ranking.
### Example
Sample output (first 5 lines) to the following command:  
```
$ ./decision-list-train.py interest-n-train.txt 
2.30258509299 short interest_5 36
2.30258509299 minority interest_5 22
2.30258509299 has interest_5 17
2.30258509299 equity interest_5 13
2.30258509299 open interest_5 8
```
Each line in decision list has four items:  
* The first item is a log-likelihood of the adjacent word to determine word sense.
* Second item an adjacent word.
* Third item is a word sense that the adjacent word predicts.
* Fourth item is a number of instances the adjacent word was encountered.
### Limitations
The program is hardcoded to consider only two senses to disambiguate.  
If the training data contains more senses, only two will be considered.


## Part II - Assign senses to test data
### Description
This program examines the content of test data and assigns a word sense
to the target word based on decision list.  
To run the program, execute:  
```
$ ./decision-list-test.py decision-list.txt test-data.txt
```
The second command line argument is a name of the decision list file.  
Third argument is the training data file.  
Program writes answers to standard output.  
To write answers in a file, execute:  
```
$ ./decision-list-test.py decision-list.txt test-data.txt > answers.txt
```
### Algorithm
Adjacent words to the target word are extracted from the test file.
Then each word is looked at the decision list starting from the top.
When one of the words if found in the decision list, appropriate sense is 
assigned to the targed word.
### Example
Sample output (first 5 lines) to the following command:  
```
$ ./decision-list-test.py interest-n-decision-list.txt interest-n-test.txt
<answer instance="interest-n.int1585" senseid="interest_5"/>
<answer instance="interest-n.int1724" senseid="interest_5"/>
<answer instance="interest-n.int1555" senseid="interest_5"/>
<answer instance="interest-n.int2260" senseid="interest_5"/>
<answer instance="interest-n.int1847" senseid="interest_5"/>
```
Output is formatted according to the key file provided for this assignment.

## Part III - Evaluate test data
### Description
The program compares answers generated by decision-list-test.py program
with the correct answers, calculates accuracy, and outputs confusion matrix.  
To run the program from terminal, execute:  
```
./decision-list-eval.py line-key.txt line-answers.txt
```
Second command line argument is a filename for the correct answer file,  
third argument is for the answer file generated by decision-list-test.py
### Example
Sample output to the following command:  
```
% ./decision-list-eval.py interest-n-key.txt interest-n-answers.txt
Total count: 121
Correct count: 111
Accuracy: 91.74%
Confusion Matrix: (raw counts)
----------| interest_5 | interest_6
interest_5                    7
interest_6     3
```


